### *<Doc version 2.0>*

# CEM and 1.21.2+

This is a summary / report of the changes made to vanilla entity rendering & models in Minecraft release 1.21.2+ 

specifically as to how this will affect EMF & OptiFine CEM pack makers going forwards.

These are all reflective of changes in the vanilla game that will have impacts for both EMF and OptiFine CEM, though these specifics are only set in stone for EMF until OptiFine updates.

## Changes

### armor textures
all armor texture locations have changed for humanoids, horses, etc.

same goes for trims.

Emissive trim textures will now be located at `textures/trims/entity/humanoid/<trim_type>_<material>_e.png` or `textures/trims/entity/humanoid_leggings/<trim_type>_<material>_e.png`

These new emissive trim texture locations might change depending on what OptiFine does for 1.21.2+

ETF can now variate armor textures (not trims) as it would any other entity with .properties files, though you will still get much better control via CIT

### all models
every entity model is now rendered directly from their `root` part, prior to this only a few mobs did this.
This means all models may now benefit from having transforms applied to their root parts.

There are still of course several mobs that receive additional rotations and/or scaling outside their root part,
e.g. slime scaling or squid rotations.

### all mob models that can be babies
all baby mobs now use a completely separate model to their adult counterparts, these models are still usually made the 
same shape and size as the adult models and are rescaled automatically.

- "baby" armor stands will use `armor_stand_small`
- All other baby models will use the regular adult name but add `_baby` at the end 
- e.g. `pig_baby.jem`
- this is considered with the entity name so will go before additional words such as saddle here `pig_baby_saddle.jem`
- `elytra_baby.jem` also exists o.O
- all baby mobs also have their own separate armor models, 
e.g. `zombie_baby_inner_armor.jem`, `zombie_baby_outer_armor.jem`. New fallback models `baby_inner_armor.jem` and `baby_outer_armor.jem` have been added to compliment the adult fallbacks.

if a _baby model doesn't exist for a mob, the adult model will be used and scaled down to the size of a baby.
However custom animations built for adult models usually do not work well on baby models if they transforms the pivots, this will break for packs like Fresh Animations that will need to update for 1.21.2+.

### humanoid models
All humanoid models with a `headwear` part now internally have their `headwear` part moved to be inside the `head` part.
This means that the `headwear` part will now automatically inherit all custom animation transforms applied to the `head` part.

*This does break all humanoid head models in Fresh Animations :(*

### player models
Just like the change for `headwear` and `head` listed above, all of the second skin layer parts of the player model are 
now moved to be inside their base part. e.g. `left_sleeve` is now inside `left_arm`. Meaning they will now all inherit the
custom animation transforms of their base part.

*This will break most custom player animation packs unless they use different cubes*

the player model no longer includes the `ear` & `cloak` parts, these are now separate models I will detail further below.

### boat models
different boat type models now use the format <wood_type>_<boat_type>.jem e.g. `oak_boat.jem`, `oak_chest_boat.jem`, and the rafts `bamboo_raft.jem`, `bamboo_chest_raft.jem`
this differs from EMF previously using their vanilla model id such as `boat/oak.jem`

the models `boat.jem`, `raft.jem`, and their chest equivalents, still exist as fallbacks for all boats and rafts if their specific type model doesn't exist.

the `bottom_no_water` part is no longer found inside the boat model and instead has its own separate model detailed further below.

## new models
some new entity models were added, some of these already existed via special additional code in EMF and OptiFine (such as arrows)
and will likely experience changes in how they are rendered.

### ear models
the `ear` part of the player model is now a separate model, `player_ears.jem`, this is rendered after the player model.

### cloak models
the `cloak` part of the player model is now a separate model, `player_cape.jem`, this is rendered after the player model.
EMF did previously have a custom implementation for `player_cape.jem` this has been removed in all 1.21.2+ versions, 
and will eventually be backported in a way that fully replicates this new vanilla model's pivots and transforms.

### more notes (2.0 doc edit)
- updated model & part names, see the `emf > models > all models` settings in game for the most detailed and accurate list of all model & part names
    - dragon - "neck1 - neck5" and "tail1 - tail12", replacing "spine"
    - bogged - same as skeleton + "mushrooms" part
    - bogged_outer - same as stray_outer
    - armadillo - see in-game model settings screen for parts list
    - end_crystal - "inner_glass" and "outer_glass" replacing "glass"
    - arrow - "back, cross_1, cross_2"
    - spectral_arrow - "back, cross_1, cross_2"
    - bee_stinger - "cross_1, cross_2"
    - player_cape - "cape"
    - player_ears - "left_ear" and "right_ear"
    - player_slim - will now fallback to player.jem if not present
    - salmon_large - falls back to "salmon"
    - salmon_small - falls back to "salmon"
    - breeze_wind_charge - same as "wind_charge"
    - boat models now use the naming convention <wood_type>_<boat_type> e.g. "oak_boat" and "oak_chest_boat" and fallback to the old model names e.g. "boat" and "chest_boat"
    - raft and boat models no longer contain the "water_patch" part themselves, this is now a separate model
    - water_patch - "water_patch" also supports boat type variants e.g. "oak_water_patch"
    - minecraft models now all fallback to the default minecart model
    - chest_large - has been split into "chest_left" and "chest_right" models, same for trapped_chests. EMF will retain legacy support for the old model name for the time being
    - wall_sign - falls back to the "sign" model and doesn't have the "stick" part
    - sign, wall_sign, and hanging_sign - all support wood types in the model name e.g. "oak_sign" and "oak_wall_sign" that will fall back to the generic model
    - there may be several more minor changes, see the in-game `emf > models > all models` settings screen for the most accurate and complete list
- added legacy model fallbacks `book`, `evocation_illager`, `evocation_fangs`, and `vindication_illager`


